custom roles: rank-based authorization (#651)
aranya-project/aranya: crates/aranya-daemon/src/policy.md

- **Roles** control command permissions. Currently we expose a set of
  "default roles" - `owner` (emergency access), `admin` (system
  administration), `operator` (user management), and `member` (basic
  usage). This policy has the capability to define custom roles as well.
- **Rank** is an attribute associated with each object that determines whether a higher ranked object can operate on a lower ranked object. 
Any object in the system with an Aranya ID can have a rank associated with it in the policy.
Rank checks are only concerned with ranks associated with devices, roles, and labels specifically when determining if an object has permission to perform certain operations.

> The team does not need a rank associated with it since all operations implicitly occur within the context of a team.

Author: I added some rank examples including a few with 3 objects. Let me know if there are other examples you have in mind.

> The team does not need a rank associated with it since all operations implicitly occur within the context of a team.

Author: ```
  Issue 4: Object Management Lockout                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                     
  Scenario: High-rank objects become unmanageable.                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                     
  Owner (rank MAX) creates Label X (rank 900)                                                                                        
  Owner demotes self to rank 850 (allowed - can downgrade self)                                                                      
                                                                                                                                     
  Now no device can manage Label X (assign/revoke) because no device outranks it. The label is effectively frozen. 
```

> The team does not need a rank associated with it since all operations implicitly occur within the context of a team.

Author: I've added examples to the policy with 2-3 objects. While working through these scenarios I realized there are ways to invert the role rank > device rank invariant. I've added a check that prevents a device from being promoted to a rank higher than its current role. This only covers some of the cases where the invariant could be violated. For the other cases, I've added documentation on risk mitigations in the application since it is to difficult to enforce in the invariant without iteration.

TerminateTeam(500) -> DeleteFoo(400) -> RevokeFoo(300) -> CreateFoo(200) -> UseFoo(100)

Commands that must be called first should have a higher priority than commands that depend on them.
For example, a command to create/assign a label to a device should be higher priority than a command that uses the label.

> Delete*, Revoke*, Terminate*, Remove*, etc. commands must have a higher priority assigned to them since they occur later in the weave, but must take precedence over other commands that modify the state of the object.

Author: Updating

    let author_id = device::current_device_id()
    let author_sign_pk = check_unwrap query DeviceSignPubKey[device_id: author_id]

>     let signed = crypto::sign(idam::derive_sign_key_id(author_sign_pk.key), payload)

Author: Updated this as well as another line in the policy that could be broken out into another line.

        check !exists DeviceSignPubKey[device_id: device_id]
        check !exists DeviceEncPubKey[device_id: device_id]
    } else {
        // The device DOES exist, so the device keys MUST also exist.

> 

Author: Reverted this change

        check !exists DeviceEncPubKey[device_id: device_id]
    } else {
        // The device DOES exist, so the device keys MUST also
        // exist and each key ID must be consistent with its public key.

        let ident_key_fact = unwrap query DeviceIdentPubKey[device_id: device_id]
        check device_id == idam::derive_device_id(ident_key_fact.key)

        let sign_key_fact = unwrap query DeviceSignPubKey[device_id: device_id]

>         check sign_key_fact.key_id == idam::derive_sign_key_id(sign_key_fact.key)

Reviewer: Why are we checking that something that we got from the factDB? How could it have be inserted and wrong?

Author: @djohnson-spideroak, @jdygert-spok do you know who changed the `Device` fact?

Author: Nevermind, that change was made on this PR to resolve this TODO:
```
// Records the existence of a device.
- // TODO(eric): We store the key IDs in the key facts themselves,
- // do we want to continue storing key IDs here?
- // Fact type: Single-key (one per device)
- fact Device[device_id id]=>{sign_key_id id, enc_key_id id}
+ fact Device[device_id id]=>{}
```
Looks like the key_id was previously stored in two facts when it only needed to be stored in one.

Reviewer 2: Given the point would be to reduce the chances of inconsistency, deriving once is the same as what we have now. If we want to avoid the key ID and key bytes getting out of sync, we would need to recompute.

Author: My suggestion is that we change this code to check for the existence of the key ID facts rather than the correctness of the key ID derivation. Then confirm elsewhere in unit tests that the key ID derivation function is correct/consistent if that's not already checked somewhere. If there is something wrong with the key ID derivation this check wouldn't be able to catch that anyways since it runs the derivation twice on the same inputs which should always match.

Author: We're not paying a performance cost since this is inside a `debug_assert` so there doesn't seem to be a drawback to performing this redundant check.

Reviewer 2: > We're not paying a performance cost since this is inside a `debug_assert` so there doesn't seem to be a drawback to performing this redundant check.

We wouldnt want this consistency check in debug_assert in my opinion. This is something that is more likely to happen in production, and it could completely stop a device from participating.

Author: There are 3 ways I can think of that would cause this to happen in production:
1. Key ID derivation is not deterministic (bug in key ID derivation function and not the policy's responsibility to catch)
2. Policy incorrectly derives the key ID from the key when setting up the key ID fact (this would be a bug in policy that would be caught by `debug_assert`)
3. Policy incorrectly changes the key ID fact after initializing the device (this would be a bug in the policy that should also be caught by `debug_assert` if any test code exercises that change). There shouldn't be any APIs added to modify the key ID, so this would happen if modification of the fact was accidentally added in later to a different action. Would help if it was possible to make a fact immutable after creation to guard against cases like this.

Author: If the key ID fact must always be checked for consistency with the derived key ID from the key fact, then the performance benefit of storing the key ID for faster lookup in facts is no longer present. In this case, it would be better to remove the key ID facts and always derive them each time. I prefer the immutable fact solution to that since it preserves the performance optimization. Although I'd rather remove the performance optimization in favor of future-proofing the policy if immutable facts aren't something we can support for this feature.

Author: @djohnson-spideroak, @mooreoak I've updated the docs to explain why the invariant check is present here to future-proof the policy against introducing a key/key_id mismatch bug.

Author: Update: realized the original purpose of these checks was to ensure the Device and PubKey facts were consistent. Since key_id was removed from the Device fact, the consistency check is no longer needed. The invariants to check here become that if the device exists, so should the corresponding PubKey facts. Instead of storing key_id alongside the key, always derive the key_id directly from the key so it is impossible for it to get out of sync.

        device_id id,
    }

    seal { }

>     open { }

Author: Caveat here is that unit tests are intentionally not implemented on this PR yet until the spec is approved. So the newly added commands do not yet have unit tests. Although the plan is to add unit tests covering the new rank-based policy once the spec is approved. I expect that these queries will work similarly to all the existing queries that have already been implemented.

}
```

## Object Rank

### Overview

Each object in Aranya's RBAC system has a rank associated with its Aranya ID.

> The highest rank is MAX_U32 while the lowest rank is 0.

Reviewer 3: I think that's the right move. Let's not repeat the mistake of Unix nice values or THAC0. :)

> The highest rank is MAX_U32 while the lowest rank is 0.

Author: I'll keep 0 as the lowest rank and MAX_U32 as the highest rank unless there are objections.

> The highest rank is MAX_U32 while the lowest rank is 0.

Reviewer 3: The only objection I'd have is `int`s are actually `i64` so `u32::MAX` isn't the maximum end of possible values. But if we're effectively clamping it to a smaller range I don't see a problem.

Objects with higher rank are allowed to operate on objects with a lower rank.
For example, a command author with rank 10 would a be allowed to assign a label of rank 5 to a device of rank 4 because both of the objects it is operating on are lower rank than the author of the command.

### Rank Fact

Each object in Aranya's RBAC system has zero or one rank associated with its Aranya ID.

```policy
// An object rank.
fact Rank[object_id id]=>{rank int}
```

### Rank Comparison

Utility method for checking object ranks before allowing operations to be performed.

```policy
// Returns whether the command author object outranks the target object.
// If the command author outranks the target, it is allowed to perform operations on the target object.
//
// # Caveats
//
// - It does NOT check whether the command author has permission to perform the operation.
// - A check failure will occur if either the author or target object do not have a rank associated with them.

> function author_outranks_target(author_id id, target_id id) bool {

Author: I could modify this code to return an optional rank

> function author_outranks_target(author_id id, target_id id) bool {

Author: Is an author without rank allowed to operate on an object without rank? Or is an author without rank not allowed to operate on any objects?

> function author_outranks_target(author_id id, target_id id) bool {

Author: We recently had some discussion about whether to combine create & set rank into the same command or separate them out. The preference so far is to keep them in the same command so the creator of the object has a chance to set the initial rank. If they are separate commands, another device could set the initial rank before the creator of the object has a chance to set the rank.

    let author_rank = get_object_rank(author_id)
    let target_rank = get_object_rank(target_id)

    return author_rank > target_rank
}
```

### Rank Getter

Utility methods for getting/setting rank values on objects.

```policy
// Get initial object rank.
function get_initial_rank(rank optional int, author_id id) int {
    if rank is Some {
        return unwrap rank
    } else {
        return saturating_sub(get_object_rank(author_id), 1)
    }
}

// Get the rank of an object.
function get_object_rank(object_id id) int {
    let rank = check_unwrap query Rank[object_id: object_id]

    return rank.rank
}

// Unset the rank of an object.
//
// Assumptions:
// - The object has a rank.
// - The author has a higher rank than the object.
// - The rank should only be unset if the object is being deleted.

> finish function unset_object_rank(object_id id) {

Author: `let rank = get_object_rank(object_id)` seems more readable than `let rank = check_unwrap query Rank[object_id: object_id]`

}

action set_rank(object_id id, rank int) {
    publish SetRank {
        object_id: object_id,
        rank: rank,
    }
}

effect RankSet {
    // The ID of the object rank was set on.
    object_id id,
    // The rank set on the object.
    rank int,
}

command SetRank {
    attributes {
        priority: 100
    }

    fields {
        // The ID of the object to set the rank on.
        object_id id,
        // The rank to associate with the object.
        rank int,
    }

    seal { return seal_command(serialize(this)) }
    open { return deserialize(open_envelope(envelope)) }

    policy {
        check team_exists()

        let author = get_author(envelope)

        // Devices cannot set rank on themselves.
        check author.device_id != this.object_id

        // The author must have permission to set rank.
        check device_has_simple_perm(author.device_id, SimplePerm::SetRank)

        // Object must not already have a rank; use ChangeRank instead.
        check !exists Rank[object_id: this.object_id]

        // Author must outrank the rank it is setting.
        let author_rank = get_object_rank(author.device_id)

>         check author_rank > this.rank

Reviewer: this should be `>=` or else there is no way to set any other actor to the top rank.

Author: Updated this

// - The command author must know the correct old rank before setting the new rank.
finish function change_object_rank(object_id id, old_rank int, new_rank int) {
    update Rank[object_id: object_id]=>{rank: old_rank} to {rank: new_rank}
}

action change_rank(object_id id, old_rank int, new_rank int) {
    publish ChangeRank {
        object_id: object_id,
        old_rank: old_rank,
        new_rank: new_rank,
    }
}

effect RankChanged {
    // The ID of the object rank was set on.
    object_id id,
    // The old rank associated with the object.
    old_rank int,
    // The new rank associated with the object.
    new_rank int,
}

command ChangeRank {
    attributes {
        priority: 100
    }

    fields {
        // The ID of the object to set the rank on.
        object_id id,
        // The old rank associated with the object.
        old_rank int,
        // The new rank to associate with the object.
        new_rank int,
    }

    seal { return seal_command(serialize(this)) }
    open { return deserialize(open_envelope(envelope)) }

    policy {
        check team_exists()

        let author = get_author(envelope)

        // Devices cannot set rank on themselves.

>         check author.device_id != this.object_id

Author: If we allow a device to change its own rank, then we don't need to check the old rank before allowing the rank change, because we only need to ensure it isn't escalating its rank. When changing the rank of a different device, the old rank and new rank both need to be checked because we need to make sure the other outranks the other device and isn't escalating the rank above its own rank.

}
```

## Object Rank

### Overview

Each object in Aranya's RBAC system has a rank associated with its Aranya ID.
The highest rank is MAX_U32 while the lowest rank is 0.
Objects with higher rank are allowed to operate on objects with a lower rank.
The ranking system is used to ensure that all objects and operations abide by an application-defined hierarchy. The hierarchy can be audited by ensuring that numerical rank values fall into the expected hierarchical levels.

> Lower ranked objects are guaranteed to not have permission to operate higher ranked objects.

Author: Updated

}

action set_rank(object_id id, rank int) {
    publish SetRank {
        object_id: object_id,
        rank: rank,
    }
}

effect RankSet {
    // The ID of the object rank was set on.
    object_id id,
    // The rank set on the object.
    rank int,
}

command SetRank {
    attributes {
        priority: 100
    }

    fields {
        // The ID of the object to set the rank on.
        object_id id,
        // The rank to associate with the object.
        rank int,
    }

    seal { return seal_command(serialize(this)) }
    open { return deserialize(open_envelope(envelope)) }

    policy {
        check team_exists()

        let author = get_author(envelope)

        // Devices cannot set rank on themselves.
        check author.device_id != this.object_id

        // The author must have permission to set rank.
        check device_has_simple_perm(author.device_id, SimplePerm::SetRank)

        // Object must not already have a rank; use ChangeRank instead.
        check !exists Rank[object_id: this.object_id]

        // Author must outrank the rank it is setting.
        let author_rank = get_object_rank(author.device_id)

>         check author_rank >= this.rank

Reviewer 3: Why doesn't this use `author_outranks_target`?

Author: No reason, it would be better to use `author_outranks_target`

// - A check failure will occur if either the author or target object do not have a rank associated with them.
function author_outranks_target(author_id id, target_id id) bool {
    let author_rank = get_object_rank(author_id)
    let target_rank = get_object_rank(target_id)

    return author_rank > target_rank
}
```

### Rank Getter

Utility methods for getting/setting rank values on objects.

```policy
// Get initial object rank.
function get_initial_rank(rank optional int, author_id id) int {
    if rank is Some {
        return unwrap rank
    } else {
        return saturating_sub(get_object_rank(author_id), 1)
    }
}

// Get the rank of an object.
function get_object_rank(object_id id) int {
    let rank = check_unwrap query Rank[object_id: object_id]

    return rank.rank
}

// Unset the rank of an object.
//
// Assumptions:
// - The object has a rank.
// - The author has a higher rank than the object.
// - The rank should only be unset if the object is being deleted.
finish function unset_object_rank(object_id id) {
    // Delete object rank fact.
    delete Rank[object_id: object_id]
}
```

> ### SetRank Command

Author: Removed `SetRank` in favor of `ChangeRank`

Lower ranked objects are guaranteed to not have permission to operate on higher ranked objects.

For example, a command author with rank 10 would be allowed to assign a label of rank 5 to a device of rank 4 because both of the objects it is operating on are lower rank than the author of the command.

It is recommended to never grant a role of lower rank a permission that a device of higher rank does not have. If this scenario were to occur, the device of higher rank could onboard a pawn device to the team and assign the higher privilege but lower rank role to the pawn device in order to escalate its own privileges.

### Rank Fact

Each object in Aranya's RBAC system has at most one rank associated with its Aranya ID.

```policy
// An object rank.
fact Rank[object_id id]=>{rank int}
```

### Rank Comparison

Utility method for checking object ranks before allowing operations to be performed.

```policy
// Returns whether the command author object has permission to perform an operation on the target object.
// The command author's role must have permission to perform the operation.

> // The command author must have a higher rank than all the objects it is operating on.

Author: ```suggestion
// The command author must have a higher rank than the object it is operating on.
```

function author_has_perm_three_targets(author_id id, perm enum Perm, target_id1 id, target_id2 id, target_id3 id) bool {
    check device_has_perm(author_id, perm)
    let author_rank = get_object_rank(author_id)
    if !author_can_operate_on_target(author_rank, target_id1) {
        return false
    }
    if !author_can_operate_on_target(author_rank, target_id2) {
        return false
    }
    if !author_can_operate_on_target(author_rank, target_id3) {
        return false
    }

    return true
}

// Returns whether the author device's rank is high enough for it to operate on the target object.
function author_can_operate_on_target(author_rank int, target_id id) bool {
    let object_rank = get_object_rank(target_id)
    if author_rank <= object_rank {
        return false
    }

    return true
}
```

### Rank Getters/Setters

Utility methods for getting/setting rank values on objects.

```policy
// Get the rank of an object.
function get_object_rank(object_id id) int {
    let rank = check_unwrap query Rank[object_id: object_id]

    return rank.rank
}

// Set the rank of an object.
//
// Assumptions:

> // - Object rank must not exist yet.

Reviewer 4: Fixed

    update Rank[object_id: object_id]=>{rank: old_rank} to {rank: new_rank}
}

action change_rank(object_id id, old_rank int, new_rank int) {
    publish ChangeRank {
        object_id: object_id,
        old_rank: old_rank,
        new_rank: new_rank,
    }
}

effect RankChanged {
    // The ID of the object rank was set on.
    object_id id,
    // The old rank associated with the object.
    old_rank int,
    // The new rank associated with the object.
    new_rank int,
}

command ChangeRank {
    attributes {
        priority: 100
    }

    fields {
        // The ID of the object to set the rank on.
        object_id id,
        // The old rank associated with the object.
        old_rank int,
        // The new rank to associate with the object.
        new_rank int,
    }

    seal { return seal_command(serialize(this)) }
    open { return deserialize(open_envelope(envelope)) }

    policy {
        check team_exists()

        let author = get_author(envelope)

        // The author must have permission to change the rank.
        if author.device_id == this.object_id {
            // An object can always downgrade its own rank.

>             check device_has_perm(author.device_id, Perm::ChangeRank)

Author: Should we allow devices to downgrade their own rank even if they don't have the `ChangeRank` perm?

// The command author's role must have permission to perform the operation.
// The command author must have a higher rank than all the objects it is operating on.
function author_has_perm_two_targets(author_id id, perm enum Perm, target_id1 id, target_id2 id) bool {
    check device_has_perm(author_id, perm)
    let author_rank = get_object_rank(author_id)
    if !author_can_operate_on_target(author_rank, target_id1) {
        return false
    }
    if !author_can_operate_on_target(author_rank, target_id2) {
        return false
    }

    return true
}

// Returns whether the command author outranks the target object.
function author_can_operate_on_target(author_rank int, target_id id) bool {
    let object_rank = get_object_rank(target_id)
    if author_rank > object_rank {
        return true
    }

    return false
}
```

### Rank Getters/Setters

Utility methods for getting/setting rank values on objects.

```policy
// Get the rank of an object.
function get_object_rank(object_id id) int {
    let rank = check_unwrap query Rank[object_id: object_id]

    return rank.rank
}

// Set the rank of an object.
//
// Assumptions:
// - Object rank must not exist yet.

> // - Author must have higher rank than rank it is setting.

Reviewer: I think it i required that the author can set a rank equal to it's own, but I am not sure.

finish function set_object_rank(object_id id, rank int) {
    // Create new rank fact.
    create Rank[object_id: object_id]=>{rank: rank}
}
```

### ChangeRank Command

Command for changing the rank of an object.

```policy
// Maximum rank an object can have: i64::MAX.
let MAX_RANK = 9223372036854775807

// Change the rank of an object.
//
// Assumptions:
// - The object must already have a rank.

> // - The command author must have a higher rank than the old and new rank.

Reviewer: I expect we need this to be the author must have a higher rank then the old rank and greater then or equal to the new rank.

Author: Will update to:
```
// - The command author must have rank > the old rank.
// - The command author must have rank >= the new rank.
```

finish function change_object_rank(object_id id, old_rank int, new_rank int) {
    update Rank[object_id: object_id]=>{rank: old_rank} to {rank: new_rank}
}

action change_rank(object_id id, old_rank int, new_rank int) {
    publish ChangeRank {
        object_id: object_id,
        old_rank: old_rank,
        new_rank: new_rank,
    }
}

effect RankChanged {
    // The ID of the object rank was set on.
    object_id id,
    // The old rank associated with the object.
    old_rank int,
    // The new rank associated with the object.
    new_rank int,
}

command ChangeRank {
    attributes {
        priority: 100
    }

    fields {
        // The ID of the object to set the rank on.
        object_id id,
        // The old rank associated with the object.
        old_rank int,
        // The new rank to associate with the object.
        new_rank int,
    }

    seal { return seal_command(serialize(this)) }
    open { return deserialize(open_envelope(envelope)) }

    policy {
        check team_exists()

        let author = get_author(envelope)

        // Check that the object exists before changing its rank.

>         // TODO: should object existence be tracked in a single fact?

Author: Adding a new fact for object existence would make tracking object existence easier here. But, there are a couple cons:
- Uses up more storage that isn't strictly needed (since object existence can be deduced from the other facts)
- Keeping all the facts in sync would be more tricky (with each object creation/deletion operation)

A good compromise could be a helper method to check for object existence so it doesn't appear inline in the `ChangeRank` implementation. If there are any other places in the policy that want to check for object existence in the future, they can use that helper method.

For example, a command author with rank 10 would be allowed to assign a label of rank 5 to a device of rank 4 because both of the objects it is operating on are lower rank than the author of the command.

> It is recommended to never grant a role of lower rank a permission that a device of higher rank does not have. If this scenario were to occur, the device of higher rank could onboard a pawn device to the team and assign the higher privilege but lower rank role to the pawn device in order to escalate its own privileges.

Author: Providing a link to the section with more info.

    create Rank[object_id: object_id]=>{rank: rank}
}
```

### ChangeRank Command

Command for changing the rank of an object.

```policy

> // Maximum rank an object can have.

Reviewer: is this i64 max?

    return role_rank >= device_rank
}

// Returns whether a label's rank is >= a device's rank.
//
// This check prevents a device from being assigned a label it could
// potentially operate on (delete, assign to others, revoke from others).
//
// Note: Uses greater-than-or-equal (>=) comparison, unlike `author_can_operate_on_target`
// which uses strict greater-than (>). This allows a device to be assigned a label of equal
// rank, which is safe because the device still cannot operate on that label (since operations
// require strictly outranking the target).

> function label_rank_gte_device_rank(label_id id, device_id id) bool {

Reviewer: I am not sure why we need this constraint. If we want to have this separation we can doing by ensuring that there is not a overlap in the roles which can administer and use label.

### ChangeRank Command

Command for changing the rank of a device or label.

If the target object is a device with an assigned role, the new rank must not
exceed the role's rank. This maintains the invariant that `role_rank > device_rank`
which was established at role assignment time. To promote a device above its
current role's rank, first change the device's role to one with a higher rank.

#### Role Ranks Are Immutable

Role ranks cannot be changed after creation. This design decision maintains the
invariant that `role_rank > device_rank` for all devices assigned to the role
without requiring complex checks that would need to iterate over all assigned
devices.

If a different rank is needed for a role, create a new role with the desired
rank and permissions, migrate devices to it, then delete the old role.

```policy
// Default maximum rank for the team creator device.
let MAX_RANK = 1000000

// TODO: aranya-core#582 use const expression once supported by the
// policy language. E.g.:

> //   let DEFAULT_OWNER_DEVICE_RANK = MAX_RANK

Reviewer 3: FWIW I think this specific case of referencing another identifier would be pretty easy to add.

Reviewer 3: The arithmetic would be different. By "specific case" I mean the exact case of `let X = Y`.

Command for changing the rank of an object.

If the target object is a device with an assigned role, the new rank must not
exceed the role's rank. This maintains the invariant that `role_rank >= device_rank`
which was established at role assignment time. To promote a device above its
current role's rank, first change the device's role to one with a higher rank.

#### Role Rank Changes and the Device-Role Invariant

The policy enforces `role_rank >= device_rank` at assignment time and when
promoting devices. However, the policy does not prevent demoting a role's rank
below devices that hold it. Enforcing this would require iterating over all

> devices assigned to the role, which the policy language does not support.

Author: A role's rank is supposed to be higher than any devices it is assigned to. If a role's rank was somehow lower than devices it is assigned to (which is not recommended), promoting the role's rank would only help to enforce the role_rank >= device_rank invariant. Here's what claude responded with:
```
Promoting a role's rank (increasing it) is always safe - it maintains or widens                                              
the gap where `role_rank >= device_rank`. Only demoting a role's rank is risky.  
```

If a single role has too many permissions, it can attempt to use those permissions to escalate its own permissions, escalate permissions of other devices on the team, or onboard malicious devices it maintains control of to be used as a stronghold for future downgrade resistance.

#### Privilege Escalation Attempt Scenario 1

The following scenario describes a possible privilege escalation attempt as well as policy and operational mitigations to prevent the attack vector from occurring. 

1. Malicious device onboards a new pawn device it maintains control of (`AddDevice` perm).
2. Malicious device creates a new role (`CreateRole` perm).
3. Malicious device assigns a permission to that role it does not have (`ChangeRolePerms` perm). Policy does not allow this to happen.
4. Malicious device assigns role with escalated permissions to the pawn device (`AssignRole` perm).
5. Malicious device now has escalated permissions via the pawn device it controls.

> We guard against this privilege escalation vector in the policy by only allowing devices to assign permissions to roles which they already have themselves in the `ChangeRolePerms` command. This prevents devices from escalating their own permissions via other roles which they control by breaking step 3. in the chain.

Author: We decided today to allow a device to assign a perm it doesn't have to a role as long as:
- The device outranks the role
- The device's role has the `AddPermToRole` perm

Users should be cautious about assigning the `AddPermToRole` and `AssignRole` perms to the same role to prevent it from having too much power.

}

// Converts `perm` to a string.

> function perm_to_str(perm enum Perm) string {

Reviewer: @gknopf-aranya My question is why we need to convert to and from strings at all when we could just use the enums directly in the APIs

> function perm_to_str(perm enum Perm) string {

Author: @mooreoak if we use enums in the policy API and within the policy, then you are correct that there is no need to convert between strings and enums. This corresponds with a comment I left on the original custom roles PR. The point I'm making here is that string permissions were intentionally used in the APIs as one of the original design decisions when developing custom roles. The rationale for using strings instead of enums in the APIs had to do with backward compatibility of the policy interface. If we aren't concerned with keeping the custom roles policy interface backward compatible, then I don't see a reason not to use enums in the API.

#### Privilege Escalation Attempt Scenario 1

The following scenario describes a possible privilege escalation attempt as well as policy and operational mitigations to prevent the attack vector from occurring. 

1. Malicious device onboards a new pawn device it maintains control of (`AddDevice` perm).
2. Malicious device creates a new role (`CreateRole` perm).
3. Malicious device assigns a permission to that role it does not have (`ChangeRolePerms` perm). Policy does not allow this to happen.
4. Malicious device assigns role with escalated permissions to the pawn device (`AssignRole` perm).
5. Malicious device now has escalated permissions via the pawn device it controls.

We guard against this privilege escalation vector in the policy by only allowing devices to assign permissions to roles which they already have themselves in the `ChangeRolePerms` command. This prevents devices from escalating their own permissions via other roles which they control by breaking step 3. in the chain.

> It is also recommended to segment the `AddDevice`, `CreateRole`, `ChangeRolePerms`, and `AssignRole` permissions across different roles to prevent a single device from controlling device onboarding, role permissions management, and role assignment. A similar approach is recommended to mitigate against privilege escalation for label management.

Author: ```suggestion
It is also recommended to segment the `AddDevice`, `CreateRole`, `ChangeRolePerms`, and `AssignRole` permissions across different roles to prevent a single device from controlling device onboarding, role permissions management, and role assignment. A similar approach is recommended to mitigate against privilege escalation for label management.

Note that it is important to segment permissions across different roles with the same rank. If the roles have different ranks, one role will outrank the other role and could leverage its privilege over the other role to assign that role to a pawn device it controls in order to escalate permissions.
```

        let author = get_author(envelope)

        // The author must have permission to change role perms.
        check author_has_perm_one_target(author.device_id, Perm::ChangeRolePerms, this.role_id)

        // The author device can only grant a permission it has to the target device.
        // This check is to mitigate against privilege escalation attempts.
        check device_has_perm(author.device_id, this.perm)

        // The role must not already have the permission.

>         check !role_has_perm(this.role_id, this.perm)

Author: If the target role already has the permission assigned to it, I don't see a reason for that to cause a check failure.
It's possible two add perm commands raced to add the the same perm to the role.
All the author should care about is whether the target role has the permission it intended to add to the role after this command completes. As long as the target role has the intended permission, it seems okay for this command to succeed. We can skip creation of the fact if it already exists.

Author: Same logic likely applies to role assignment.

Reviewer: I think it would be better to fail with a dose not exist error in an effect in most cases. That's communicates what happened. Just succeeding would tell that application layer the state changed when it did not.

        check team_exists()

        let author = get_author(envelope)

        // The author must have permission to change role perms.
        check author_has_perm_one_target(author.device_id, Perm::ChangeRolePerms, this.role_id)

>         // TODO: should the author only be allowed to remove a permission it also has?

Reviewer 2: Did we resolve this?

Author: I'll need to look into this again. I vaguely recall discussing this and deciding not to do this, which is why the TODO is still here.

Author: Removed this TODO

        check team_exists()

        let author = get_author(envelope)

        // Author must have permission to setup the default roles.
        check device_has_perm(author.device_id, Perm::SetupDefaultRole)

        check !exists DefaultRoleSeeded[name: this.name]

        let name = default_role_name_to_str(this.name)
        let role_id = derive_role_id(envelope)

>         let admin_role_rank = 800

Author: If the owner with `MAX_RANK` creates a new role with the deprecated `create_role()` API, it will grant that role a rank of `MAX_RANK - 1` by default which would put the new custom role at a higher rank than the admin, operator, and member roles. This isn't ideal but I don't see a way around it unless we set new custom roles to a lower rank than the lowest default role rank.

Author: `create_role()` is behind preview currently, so we can modify the API to require specifying a rank rather than supporting a deprecated API where this is a concern.

            create DeviceGeneration[device_id: owner_key_ids.device_id]=>{generation: 0}

            add_new_device(this.owner_keys, owner_key_ids, 1000)

            create_role_facts(RoleInfo {
                role_id: owner_role_id,
                name: "owner",
                author_id: author_id,
                rank: 900,
                default: true,
            })
            // Set the object rank of the owner device.

>             set_object_rank(author_id, 10000)

Author: I wanted to use the max value here but wasn't sure how to so I set it to something big for an initial prototype.

        // The ID of the 'owner' role.
        let owner_role_id = derive_role_id(envelope)

        let owner_device_rank = 1000

>         let owner_role_rank = 900

Reviewer 4: I suppose setting it to `MAX_RANK -  1` only allows the creator of the team to assign it which may be too restrictive.

As an aside, maybe we should refer to the device that creates the team as the "creator" since there can be multiple devices that have the "owner" role.

>         let owner_role_rank = 900

Author: Perhaps for role assignment we want devices to be able to assign roles to other devices where the role rank is <= the author rank, but the target device rank is < the author rank. @mooreoak, @chip-so, @jdygert-spok what are your thoughts on this corner-case?

>         let owner_role_rank = 900

Author: The downside of handling the controls differently for this particular corner-case is that we can't reuse the generic perm/rank check code for role assign/revoke.

        finish {
            create TeamStart[]=>{team_id: team_id}

            create DeviceGeneration[device_id: owner_key_ids.device_id]=>{generation: 0}

            add_new_device(this.owner_keys, owner_key_ids, owner_device_rank)

            create_role_facts(RoleInfo {
                role_id: owner_role_id,
                name: "owner",
                author_id: author_id,
                rank: owner_role_rank,
                default: true,
            })
            // Set the object rank of the owner device (i64::MAX).

>             set_object_rank(author_id, MAX_RANK)

Reviewer 4: Fixed

    fields {
        // The new device's public Device Keys.
        device_keys struct KeyBundle,
        // Device rank.

>         rank optional int,

Reviewer: We can do this at the C/Rust API instead of making the policy more complicated.

>         rank optional int,

Author: I initially had two separate commands in the policy for `add_device()` and `add_device_with_rank()`. This meant that action, policy, check, finish, etc. which are almost identical were copied into another location. The likelihood of introducing a difference in the logic between these commands which are supposed to be nearly identical increases if they are maintained in two different places.

>         rank optional int,

Author: This is a good approach. That reminds me, we do need to add a rank query to the policy.
